As we mentioned in the previous video,
cluster analysis can be viewed
as an optimization problem.
Excel includes an optimization
tool called Solver.
We'll not get into the details of how
Solver works because we will cover
optimization later in this course.
Also, the approach of using Solver for
the cluster analysis is only practical for
datasets that are relatively small.
So we just want to show that it is
possible to use Excel to approach
cluster analysis from the point of
view of an optimization problem.
To make it more interesting we're
going to show how to use Excel for
cluster analysis using an example.
As we mention before, companies are often
interested in segmenting their customers
to better target a specific product
offerings to meet specific customer needs.
Let’s assume that an online
retailer has collected data
on three contents of her customers.
This data is in the Excel file
Market Segmentation- Excel.
You might want to pause
the video to locate the file and
open it so you can follow along or
just continue to watch the video and
play with the model later, it's up to you.
Let us start in the original Data tab
to examine what data was collected for
each of the three candy customers.
You can see that for each customer,
there are two demographic variables,
income level and number of dependence as
well as two buying behavior variables,
number of purchases made last year, and
the average value of each purchase.
Let's assume that the online
retailers wants to know
if the data supports the hypothesis that
there are three segments in her market.
So we're going to use closer analysis
to help her answer this question.
The first step in our analysis
is to normalize the data.
Recall that normalization is
a transformation of each variable
in the dataset.
In our table, the variables
are in the columns label Income,
Average Purchase, Last year purchases and
the Number of Dependents.
The normalization consists
of subtracting the mean and
dividing by the standard deviation.
Click on the normalized Data tab
to see the normalized values.
The normalized values have a mean of 0 and
a standard deviation of 1.
Now, click on the Clusters
tab to look at the model.
The model is based on the idea of choosing
three customers to represent the centroids
of the three clusters.
Cells H5, H6, and H7 have the three
customers that haven't chosen a centroids.
The arbitrary solution that is shown on
the spreadsheet consists of customers 10,
20, and
30 as the centroids of the three clusters.
The center values in the table
correspond to the normalized values for
the selected customer.
For example, if we change 10 to 15,
we see that the central values change.
In this other table,
the model uses Euclidean
distances to assign the customers
to the closest cluster.
For example, we see that the first six
customers are assigned to cluster 2.
Customer 7 is assigned to cluster 3 and
customer 10 is assigned to cluster 1.
The model also calculates
the total squared distance,
which is the sum of all
the distances in column E.
Now we're ready to optimize,
which is nothing more than searching for
the set of three customers
that are the best centroids.
Clearly, the best set is the one that
minimizes the total sum of a squares.
We don't want to do this by manually
changing the values because believe it or
not, there are more than 4.4 million
ways of choosing three customers
from a set of 300.
So we're going to use
an Excel tool called Solver.
To access this tool, we got to
the Analyze Group in the Data tab.
If Solver is not there,
you need to first load it.
If you Google adding solver to Excel,
you will find instructions on how
to add Solver to the different versions
of Excel for Windows and for the Mac.
You can pause this video and come back
here once you have loaded Solver.
Okay, if your Solver is ready to go,
then click on it and
you will see that the model
is all ready there.
This is a simple model for
the set of objective,
SJ9 that is the objective function
is the total sum of squares.
We want to minimize this value so
Min is chosen.
The changing cells are the values that
the solver can manipulate to minimize your
objective function.
In this case, there are only three cells,
H5 to H7, which correspond
to the three customers that are going
to be selected as centroids.
And then, there are three constraints
related to the changing cells.
The values in the changing
cells must be integer.
They must be greater than or equal to 1,
and they must be less than or
equal to 300.
For reasons that go beyond
the scope of this course for
this particular problem,
we must choose the Evolutionary Solver.
You can now click on the Solve button.
The solution process starts, and
search progress is shown on the status
bar at the bottom of the spreadsheet.
The solution time depends
on the computer speed.
So if it is taking too long,
you can always press this
K key to stop the search.
The Evolutionary Solver is a so
called Metaheuristic.
What this means is that it cannot
guarantee that when it stops,
it has found the very best solution.
Also called the optimal solution.
When the Solver stops, it simply reports
the best solution that it could find.
It is states that the Solver can
not improve the current solution.
We're going to press the Escape key and
assert the solver solution.
Since we may end up with
different solutions,
we're going to change the solution
that we have to one that I found, and
that I would like to discuss with you.
The solution has customer 103,
as the first Centroid,
customer 112 as the second,
and customer 170 as the third.
Let's enter those values in
the corresponding cells and
examine the normalized centroid.
The normalized values are very
helpful in interpreting each
cluster because they are centered at 0.
So negative values are below average,
and positive values are above average.
Let's interpret the first cluster.
The one that has customer
103 as the centroid.
The normalized values for
this group are all negative.
The group is about one standard deviation
below the average in all attributes.
Perhaps these are students given that
their income is below average, they don't
buy very frequently, and they don't
spend a lot of money when they do buy.
Also they don't seem to have dependents.
Moving to the second cluster,
represented by customer 112 we see that
all the normalized values except for
dependent at at least one standard
deviation above the average.
This group could be one of middle aged
professionals with above average income
and average number of dependents.
They make frequent online purchases and
they spend above average
in the items they buy.
Finally, the third cluster represented by
customer 170 has an average income and
also makes purchases with a value
that is close to the average.
However, the number of dependents
that the members of this group
has is almost one standard
deviation above average.
This group could very
well represent families.
Therefore, a reasonable
conclusion in this analysis
is that the data seems to indicate that
the market for this online retailer
consists of three segments the students,
families, and professionals.
We have shown how cluster analysis can be
approached as an optimization problem.
We have mold the problem in a way that
the search for the best set of clusters is
equivalent to searching for the best set
of customers to represent each cluster.
In our model a customer
that represent a cluster
becomes the centroid of the cluster.
To illustrate the process we use
a market segmentation example.
This is the same example that we will use
in the next video to illustrate how to do
cluster analysis with Excel minor.